assignments/assignment1.md, before:

# Assignment 1
## Domains
+ **Mental health and well-being in the age of social media and AI**.
  Overreliance on social media, parasocial relationships, as well as atomization of
  social groups due to strong political and ideological polarization have made it hard
  to maintain a healthy and reliable support network, especially for young people, who
  additionally have to endure both academic and employment pressures. The problem is
  exacerbated for students, because their circles are frequently limited to their
  peers, who are often in the same situation. Therapy should be a solution to this,
  but there exist several barriers to starting it.
+ **Direction in studying and learning**. I and many other students find it interesting
  to learn about new topics, this is natural and good, but it is usally hard to find a
  good starting point, decide what's the final goal of learning about something, build
  a structured learning path, and find good resources for learning. This can lead to
  frustration and loss of interest, and it happened to me several times when trying to
  learn about new topics such as machine learning. System of higher education can help
  with this, but this help is often limited by the scope of classes, which rarely
  cover state-of-the-art topics and can be rigid.
+ **Efficient and pleasant typesetting**: many students, researchers, and
  engineers have to write math-heavy documents, such as homework assignments, research
  papers, documentation, etc. The most popular tool for this is LaTeX, which is a
  powerful markup language, but it has its downsides, such as a steep learning curve
  and a lack of interactive what-you-see-is-what-you-get (WYSIWYG) interface. I
  personally tried to learn LaTeX since high school, but was only able to get a hand
  on it during my freshman year at the university. I spent a lot of time figuring out
  my personal config for automatic snippets and typesetting workflows, which is not
  ideal for such seemingly simple thing. My friend who is a math major told me that he
  doesn't really like LaTeX and other standard typesetting tools, because they are
  structured in a way that is very different from how one would write math on paper.
+ **Quantum chemical calculations**: quantum chemistry is a field of my scientific
  interest, I really enjoy learning the theoretica foundations of it, and building
  tools that implement these ideas. However, they sometimes look like black boxes and
  it is not clear what is the best method to use in a specific case, and even if there
  are some documented recommendations, it's hard to get a good intuition of why
  particular methods work better in some cases.
+ **Small attention span and many distractions in the digital age**: there are many
  sources of distractions today, that can lead to procrastination and inefficient use
  of time.
+ **LLMs are great, but there is a large variety of them**: contemporary LLM
  benchmarks are exhaustive in their own ways, but are also vague and too technical
  (and also models are sometimes overtrained to excel at these benchmarks), general
  audience needs an illustrative and intuitive set of benchmarks to compare different
  models and determine which is best for their specific use cases.
+ **Active and efficient learning requires repetition and drilling**: I personally use
  flashcards to learn vocabulary in foreign languages and to remember facts like
  major and minor scales in music, but some disciplines, such as programming, require
  more complex and interactive exercises, and I would prefer to make them
  customizable rather than use a fixed set of exercises, e.g. from a learning app.
+ **Choosing public spaces, such as libraries, cafes, etc, to work at**: I love
  working outside of my dorm, because I can submerge myself into a working environment
  and reduce self-distraction; however, it is sometimes hard to pick a right place to
  work, as my preference depends on many feature: crowdedness, access to monitor,
  presence of collaborative study rooms etc. 
+ **Longevity for non-academia people**: more and more people are interested in
  prolonging their lifespan, but the information is spread across many sources
  (research papers, youtube videos, news, etc), so it is hard to keep track of current
  progress in a field, navigate different sources and opinions, and be able to
  distinguish between reasonable and biased claims.
+ **Expanding the span of music preferences**: I enjoy listening to music and learning
  about new genres and styles; for casual listening I use music recommendation
  systems, and they work fine, but they restrict the variety of music I listen to,
  since the recommendations are based on my previous listening history.
+ **Effective handling of jetlag**: travelling across very different time zones is
  stressful on its own, but the jetlag makes it even worse, and fixing it requires
  disciplined effort and planning.

My domains of choice are:
1. *Mental health and well-being for students in the age of social media and AI*. This
   is an interesting domaing for me for multiple reasons. First, I'm really interested
   in psychiatry and psychology, I've read several books on these topics trying to
   understand myself and what is the best way to help my friends. Secondly, I think
   that my life would have been a lot better if I started therapy earlier, so I'm
   willing to create non-annoying and effective tools to help students start therapy.
   Finally, I can observe that LLMs have an ambivalent effect on mental health domain:
   on one hand, there is direct evidence that they can mitigate symptoms of anxiety and
   depression, but on the other hand, the misuse of LLMs can exacerbate social
   isolation and give harmful advice. Also, I personally experienced interacting with
   people who used LLMs while having mental health issues, and I could observe how
   LLMs made their situation worse.
2. *Direction in study and learning*. Recently I've read a book called *Ultralearning* by
   Scott Young, which describes the approaches and strategies of efficient
   self-directed learning. It strongly resonated with me, because I saw many of these
   strategies in how I used to learn new topics when I was in high school, but from
   which I strayed away when I entered university. I tried to learn many different
   things on my own, from machine learning to organometallic chemistry, but failed due
   to the lack of structure, clear goals, and discipline.
3. *Efficient and pleasant typesetting*. I'm interested in this domain, because I come
   from scientific background, and the language of communications in science is
   papers. There are some requirements for writing papers, and one of which is to use
   LaTeX. Learning to use it was a long road for me, but even a longer road was to
   figure out how to make its usage more ergonomic and efficient, so that I can focus
   on the intellectual work, rather than the intricacies of the language. With this
   experience, I could clearly see the pain points of LaTeX, and maybe I can come up
   with something useful, maybe even for other typesetting languages, such as typst.

## Problems
### Mental health and well-being in the age of social media and AI
#### Problem 1: The misuse of LLMs for mental health support
While LLMs are good for professional and casual conversations, thay can't replace real
people when dealing with personal and mental health issues. They tend to agree with
the user, and depending on the input prompt or fine-tuning data, they can give
harmful advice, maybe even harmful to other people. LLM chatbots are widely available
today and can handle variety of tasks, so it is natural that people would try to use
them as a substitute for real therapy or even real friends and family. At the same
time, there is evidence that LLMs can be helpful for people with mild symptoms of
anxiety and depression, so the problem is not that LLMs are inherently bad, but that
they are misused and overrelied on.

#### Problem 2: Parasocial interactions disrupt social connections
[Parasocial relationships](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parasocial_interaction) are
a relatively new concept, describing relationships that people form with personas
existing in media sphere, such as famous people, influencers, streamers, etc. These
can act as a strong substitute for real social connections, especially for introverted
people. These interactions are entwined with social media usage, which can lead to
comparison with others, fear of missing out, cyberbullying, and other negative effects
which make the isolation even worse.

#### Problem 3: Barriers to starting therapy
There are many barriers to starting therapy such as cost, inconvenience, long waiting
times, and, as in my personal experience, the fear of making a leap of faith and
trying it for the first time. There is also a stigma around mental health issues and
therapy in particular, which deters people from seeking help. This is also related to
the problem of
[parasocial interactions](#problem-2-parasocial-interactions-disrupt-social-connections),
as some influencers can promote negative images of therapy and mental health issues,
to the detriment of their audience.

Commit message:

Described problems associated w/ structured learning

assignments/assignment1.md, after:

# Assignment 1
## Domains
+ **Mental health and well-being in the age of social media and AI**.
  Overreliance on social media, parasocial relationships, as well as atomization of
  social groups due to strong political and ideological polarization have made it hard
  to maintain a healthy and reliable support network, especially for young people, who
  additionally have to endure both academic and employment pressures. The problem is
  exacerbated for students, because their circles are frequently limited to their
  peers, who are often in the same situation. Therapy should be a solution to this,
  but there exist several barriers to starting it.
+ **Direction in studying and learning**. I and many other students find it interesting
  to learn about new topics, this is natural and good, but it is usally hard to find a
  good starting point, decide what's the final goal of learning about something, build
  a structured learning path, and find good resources for learning. This can lead to
  frustration and loss of interest, and it happened to me several times when trying to
  learn about new topics such as machine learning. System of higher education can help
  with this, but this help is often limited by the scope of classes, which rarely
  cover state-of-the-art topics and can be rigid.
+ **Efficient and pleasant typesetting**: many students, researchers, and
  engineers have to write math-heavy documents, such as homework assignments, research
  papers, documentation, etc. The most popular tool for this is LaTeX, which is a
  powerful markup language, but it has its downsides, such as a steep learning curve
  and a lack of interactive what-you-see-is-what-you-get (WYSIWYG) interface. I
  personally tried to learn LaTeX since high school, but was only able to get a hand
  on it during my freshman year at the university. I spent a lot of time figuring out
  my personal config for automatic snippets and typesetting workflows, which is not
  ideal for such seemingly simple thing. My friend who is a math major told me that he
  doesn't really like LaTeX and other standard typesetting tools, because they are
  structured in a way that is very different from how one would write math on paper.
+ **Quantum chemical calculations**: quantum chemistry is a field of my scientific
  interest, I really enjoy learning the theoretica foundations of it, and building
  tools that implement these ideas. However, they sometimes look like black boxes and
  it is not clear what is the best method to use in a specific case, and even if there
  are some documented recommendations, it's hard to get a good intuition of why
  particular methods work better in some cases.
+ **Small attention span and many distractions in the digital age**: there are many
  sources of distractions today, that can lead to procrastination and inefficient use
  of time.
+ **LLMs are great, but there is a large variety of them**: contemporary LLM
  benchmarks are exhaustive in their own ways, but are also vague and too technical
  (and also models are sometimes overtrained to excel at these benchmarks), general
  audience needs an illustrative and intuitive set of benchmarks to compare different
  models and determine which is best for their specific use cases.
+ **Active and efficient learning requires repetition and drilling**: I personally use
  flashcards to learn vocabulary in foreign languages and to remember facts like
  major and minor scales in music, but some disciplines, such as programming, require
  more complex and interactive exercises, and I would prefer to make them
  customizable rather than use a fixed set of exercises, e.g. from a learning app.
+ **Choosing public spaces, such as libraries, cafes, etc, to work at**: I love
  working outside of my dorm, because I can submerge myself into a working environment
  and reduce self-distraction; however, it is sometimes hard to pick a right place to
  work, as my preference depends on many feature: crowdedness, access to monitor,
  presence of collaborative study rooms etc.
+ **Longevity for non-academia people**: more and more people are interested in
  prolonging their lifespan, but the information is spread across many sources
  (research papers, youtube videos, news, etc), so it is hard to keep track of current
  progress in a field, navigate different sources and opinions, and be able to
  distinguish between reasonable and biased claims.
+ **Expanding the span of music preferences**: I enjoy listening to music and learning
  about new genres and styles; for casual listening I use music recommendation
  systems, and they work fine, but they restrict the variety of music I listen to,
  since the recommendations are based on my previous listening history.
+ **Effective handling of jetlag**: travelling across very different time zones is
  stressful on its own, but the jetlag makes it even worse, and fixing it requires
  disciplined effort and planning.

My domains of choice are:
1. *Mental health and well-being for students in the age of social media and AI*. This
   is an interesting domaing for me for multiple reasons. First, I'm really interested
   in psychiatry and psychology, I've read several books on these topics trying to
   understand myself and what is the best way to help my friends. Secondly, I think
   that my life would have been a lot better if I started therapy earlier, so I'm
   willing to create non-annoying and effective tools to help students start therapy.
   Finally, I can observe that LLMs have an ambivalent effect on mental health domain:
   on one hand, there is direct evidence that they can mitigate symptoms of anxiety and
   depression, but on the other hand, the misuse of LLMs can exacerbate social
   isolation and give harmful advice. Also, I personally experienced interacting with
   people who used LLMs while having mental health issues, and I could observe how
   LLMs made their situation worse.
2. *Direction in study and learning*. Recently I've read a book called *Ultralearning* by
   Scott Young, which describes the approaches and strategies of efficient
   self-directed learning. It strongly resonated with me, because I saw many of these
   strategies in how I used to learn new topics when I was in high school, but from
   which I strayed away when I entered university. I tried to learn many different
   things on my own, from machine learning to organometallic chemistry, but failed due
   to the lack of structure, clear goals, and discipline.
3. *Efficient and pleasant typesetting*. I'm interested in this domain, because I come
   from scientific background, and the language of communications in science is
   papers. There are some requirements for writing papers, and one of which is to use
   LaTeX. Learning to use it was a long road for me, but even a longer road was to
   figure out how to make its usage more ergonomic and efficient, so that I can focus
   on the intellectual work, rather than the intricacies of the language. With this
   experience, I could clearly see the pain points of LaTeX, and maybe I can come up
   with something useful, maybe even for other typesetting languages, such as typst.

## Problems
### Mental health and well-being in the age of social media and AI
#### Problem 1: The misuse of LLMs for mental health support
While LLMs are good for professional and casual conversations, thay can't replace real
people when dealing with personal and mental health issues. They tend to agree with
the user, and depending on the input prompt or fine-tuning data, they can give
harmful advice, maybe even harmful to other people. LLM chatbots are widely available
today and can handle variety of tasks, so it is natural that people would try to use
them as a substitute for real therapy or even real friends and family. At the same
time, there is evidence that LLMs can be helpful for people with mild symptoms of
anxiety and depression, so the problem is not that LLMs are inherently bad, but that
they are misused and overrelied on.

#### Problem 2: Parasocial interactions disrupt social connections
[Parasocial relationships](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parasocial_interaction) are
a relatively new concept, describing relationships that people form with personas
existing in media sphere, such as famous people, influencers, streamers, etc. These
can act as a strong substitute for real social connections, especially for introverted
people. These interactions are entwined with social media usage, which can lead to
comparison with others, fear of missing out, cyberbullying, and other negative effects
which make the isolation even worse.

#### Problem 3: Barriers to starting therapy
There are many barriers to starting therapy such as cost, inconvenience, long waiting
times, and, as in my personal experience, the fear of making a leap of faith and
trying it for the first time. There is also a stigma around mental health issues and
therapy in particular, which deters people from seeking help. This is also related to
the problem of
[parasocial interactions](#problem-2-parasocial-interactions-disrupt-social-connections),
as some influencers can promote negative images of therapy and mental health issues,
to the detriment of their audience.

### Direction in studying and learning
#### Problem 1: Searching for and creating structured learning paths
It is hard not only to find good starting point for learning about a new topic, but
also to figure out how to proceed further and reach the desired level of proficiency.
For specific topics, such as programming, there are many resources and tutorials that
can help with this, e.g. [NeetCode](https://neetcode.io/) that provides a whole
roadmap for preparing for coding interviews, but it is limited to problems that are
created and hosted on LeetCode platform and lacks customization and misses the social
aspect of learning, replacing it with a fixed set of exercises. Roadmaps for learning
other topics are either more vague, or not interactive and static, and sometimes even
nonexistent.

#### Problem 2: Setting up disciplined learning routines and sticking to them
The lack of self-organization and discipline is a common problem for many people who
are trying to learn something on their own. The reasons for that can be different:
from poor time management to not truly understanding and embracing why one wants to
learn specific things.

#### Problem 3: Tracking the progress of learning
Essential part that motivates people to learn is that the progress should be visible
and measurable. This is especially important for self-directed learning, when there
are no such things as exams, grades, or other external ways to assess the progress.
This way, there is a need for a benchmarking system that one can customize for their
own learning goals and be able to track the progress over time.
